
# Investigating the World Development Indicators

For this weeks homework we'll be working with data from the world bank,
listing many different development indicators for many countries. This means
you can find anything from CO2 emissions to the number of internet connections, 
listed per country from 1960 until 2016. The description from the the world
bank reads:

*The primary World Bank collection of development indicators, compiled from
officially-recognized international sources. It presents the most current and
accurate global development data available, and includes national, regional and
global estimates.*

And the list of topics they give includes:

* Agriculture & Rural Development
* Aid Effectiveness
* Climate Change
* Economy & Growth
* Education
* Energy & Mining
* Environment
* External Debt
* Financial Sector
* Gender
* Health
* Infrastructure
* Labor & Social Protection
* Poverty
* Private Sector
* Public Sector
* Science & Technology
* Social Development
* Trade
* Urban Development

So a very interesting and diverse set of data to work it. Your job this week
will be to investigate, combine and plot a part of that data!

## Getting started

The datafile can be found on the world bank site, follow the link below.

[Data file](http://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/WDI_csv.zip)

Make sure to unpack the zip. You will only need the `WDI_Data.csv` file.

We wrote a small python program to extract information from the `WDI_Data`
file. The program will do some simple conversions, fill in missing values and
can filter what parts of the data you want specifically. The new data will then
be written to a separate file.

The program can be downloaded [here](wdi_data.py) (right-click and save-as).

*The program should be stored in the same folder as `WDI_Data.csv` in order for
it to work.*

There are several commands you can use with this program. First we will try
and select an interesting topic to investigate. For this we will use the `-k`
option, which allows you to enter keywords on which to search the data
descriptions. For example, if we wanted to search all data containing the term
**CO2**, we would try

    python wdi_data.py -k CO2
    
    EN.ATM.CO2E.EG.ZS       CO2 intensity (kg per kg of oil equivalent energy use)
    EN.ATM.CO2E.GF.KT       CO2 emissions from gaseous fuel consumption (kt)
    EN.ATM.CO2E.GF.ZS       CO2 emissions from gaseous fuel consumption (% of total)
    EN.ATM.CO2E.KD.GD       CO2 emissions (kg per 2010 US$ of GDP) 
    ...

and get a list of all the relevant datacodes. Now say we wanted the "CO2
emissions from gaseous fuel consumption (kilotons)", then we would use the `-c`
option to select the code to write to a new file. In this case that would be

    python wdi_data.py -c EN.ATM.CO2E.GF.KT

which would produce a new file called `EN.ATM.CO2E.GF.KT.csv` (feel free to
rename it to something a little more clear) containing the emission data from
all the countries from 1960 to 2016.

Each line in this file will be the data for a country. The first column will be
the country-code for that country. If you want to know what all the country-codes
are, you can use the `-s` command, as in

    python wdi_data.py -s
    
    ABW     Aruba
    ADO     Andorra
    AFG     Afghanistan
    AGO     Angola
    ALB     Albania
    ...

So if you wanted to compare the emissions for Aruba and Angola, you would look
at the lines containing the codes *ABW* and *AGO*.

Start the homework this week by searching through the data file using `-k` and
creating some smaller files using `-c` for parts of the data you think are
interesting.

## Working with the data

Create a new notebook called `hw7.ipynb`. In the first cell write a short intro
about your data file(s) using markdown.

For this next part you are asked to write several functions, each function you
write should be a separate notebook cell. Make sure to add a short markdown
explanation beneath each one and add some comments in the function aswell. The
whole notebook should be understandable without knowledge of the exact
assignment.

### Function 1: `read_data(filename)`

The first function you should write is `read_data(filename)`. It should take
one argument, the filename you want to read, and return the data in the file
as a dictionary. The file should be a file generated by `wdi_data.py`,
like `EN.ATM.CO2E.GF.KT.csv` in the example above.

Reading a file in *Python* is easy, we also used it in the Lab last week to 
write the `load_words()` function. If you don't remember how to do it, take a
quick look at [Lab 6](https://progik.mprog.nl/labs/lab-6).

If you open up one of the `.csv` files or print the result of reading the lines,
you can see the structure of each file. You should notice that there are a lot
of values on each line, separated by commas, in fact that is exactly what
**CSV** stands for *Comma Separated Values*.

In order to actually use this data, we need to split each line into a list of
separate elements. Fortunately *Python* has a built-in function for just that, 
unsuprisingly called `split()`. The documentation can be found
[here](https://docs.python.org/2/library/stdtypes.html#str.split).
Look at the examples listed there and see if you can figure out how it works.

The final dictionary you return should contain the country-codes as the *keys*
and the *values* should be the complete list of the data for that country (1960
being the first value and 2016 being the last). Each element in the list should
be converted to a float, so it can be computed with.

Make sure to add a call to your function at bottom the cell and print the result,
so you can see if it actually works. Also add a new markdown cell and add a
short explanation of what you did.

### Function 2: `subset_countries(data, country_list)`

Create a new code cell for the next function; `subset_countries(data, country_list)`.
This function should take 2 arguments; the dictionary containing your
data and and a list of country-codes. It should then return a new dictionary
containing only the data for the countries in the country-code list. The
structure of the dictionary should be exactly the same as the input dictionary,
only the number of key-value pairs should change. 

Don't forget to add a test at the bottom of the cell, where you print the
result. Try and see if the values you get are what you would expect. Also, don't
forget to add a short markdown description in a separate cell below.

### Function 3: `average_data(data)`

In the next code cell write a function called `average_data(data)`.
This function should take only one argument, the dictionary containing the data.
It should then return a single list, containing the average values for all
the country-code in the dictionary, computed separately for each year in the
data. So the first value in the list should be the average for 1960, the second
for 1961, etc.

Again, add a test at the bottom and print the result. Make sure to verify that
the produced list is correct. If everything works, add a short description
in markdown.

### Function 4: `year_slice(data, start, end)`

This next function is called `year_slice(data, start, end)`. It should take
3 arguments; the dictionary containing the data, the starting year for the data
and the end year for the data. It should then cut the data for each
country-code to only start at the start year and end at the end year. Remember
that the default starting year is 1960 and the default end year is 2016. So for
instance, if you called the function like so
    
    year_slice(data, 1970, 2016)

you would expect the first 10 years to be removed from the data for each country.

Include a similar test in your code cell and print the result. Is it as you
expected? Add another short description in markdown below.

### Function 5: `compute_growth(data)`

Write a new function called `compute_growth(data)`. It should take one
argument, the dictionary containing the data and compute the 
difference (or growth) of the data between each year, for all countries. If
the value of the data for a country increases from one year to the next, the
growth will be postive for that year (the larger the value, the bigger the
increase). Conversely if the value drops from one year to the next, the growth
will be negative. 

This means the function should return a new dictionary, containing the same
country-codes, but the values should be a list of the differences between each
year. So the first value for a country would be the difference between 1960 and
1961, and the second the difference between 1961 and 1962, ect. Note that these
value lists will thus be 1 element shorter than the original data lists.

Also test this function, include a print and a short description in markdown.

### Function 6: `plot_data(data, start, end)`

In this last function we will actually visualise the data! The function should
take 3 arguments, the dictionary containing the data, the starting year for
the data and the end year for the data. It should then plot that data using
matplotlib. Make a new line in the plot for each country, where the data for
that country are the y-values, and the x-values run from `start` to `end`. Be
sure to label each line with its country-code. If you don't remember how to
do something in matplotlib, take another look at the tutorial in the matplotlib
part of the Lab.

Add a test below your function and see if it produces a plot. *Hint:* You might
want to add a `subset_countries()` in your test, to avoid drawing too many
lines in your plot. If everything works correctly, add a short description in
markdown.

## Starting the investigation

Now we should have most of the tools needed to do an investigation of the data.
This last part of the homework will be a lot more freeform, where it is up to
you to write a report about a part of the data you think is interesting.

Start by adding a new markdown cell where you write a short introduction of the
parts of the dataset you want to investigate and describe what each data-file
contains exactly. Then try to formulate a question or questions you would like
to try and answer using this data (your research question).

Make a new code cell and, using the functions you already wrote, start
investigating / plotting parts of the data. After each code cell, write a
description in markdown of what you did at that step and why.

You can then add new code-cells to plot other parts of the data, based on what
you found in earlier steps. Feel free to add new functions if you need them
for your data. Each code-cell step should be accompanied by a description in
markdown. You can also search for other references on your topic and include
them in the report as links or images.

Your notebook report should contain at least 2 different plots of your data and
accompanying descriptions. At least one external reference to your topic is
required as well. The last markdown cell should contain a conclusion, i.e. what
you think the answer is to your research question stated in the introdution,
based on the data you found.

Zip the notebook folder, including `hw7.ipynb`, any images you might want to
add and the data files you created together in a single zip called `hw7.zip`.
**Do not** add the orginal `WDI_Data.csv` file.
