
# Wordgames

This week for both the lab and the homework, you'll implement the Python wordgame!
We have already provided quite a bit of code for you to work with, and you will
fill in most of the functions. Download and save the [Week 6 code files](week_6.zip).

Let's begin by describing the Python wordgame: this game is a lot like Scrabble
or Text Twist, if you've played those. Letters are dealt to players, who then
construct one or more words out of their letters. Each valid word receives a
score, based on the length of the word and the letters in that word.

The rules of the game are as follows:

### Dealing

* A player is dealt a hand of `n` letters chosen at random (assume `n=7`
  for now).
  
* The player arranges the hand into as many words as they want out of the
  letters, but using each letter at most once.
  
* Some letters may remain unused (these won't be scored).

### Scoring

* The score for a word is the sum of the points for letters in the word,
  multiplied by the length of the word, plus 50 points if all `n` letters are
  used on the first go.

* Letters are scored as in Scrabble; *a* is worth 1, *b* is worth 3, *c* is
  worth 3, *d* is worth 2, *e* is worth 1, and so on. We have defined the
  dictionary `SCRABBLE_LETTER_VALUES` that maps each lowercase letter to its
  Scrabble letter value.
  
* For example, 'red' would be worth 12 points `(1+1+2)*3=12`, as long as
  the hand actually has at least 1 *r*, 1 *e*, and 1 *d*.
  
* As another example, if `n=7` and you get 'waybill' on the first go, it
  would be worth 155 points: `(4+1+4+3+1+1+1)*7=105` and `+50` for the bonus of
  using all seven letters.
  
## Getting started

All of you work this week will be in `wordgames.py`. There are 2 functions
already provided there:

    deal_hand(n)
    
This function deals `n` random letters to a player by returning a dictionary, 
where the keys are the letters and the values are how often that letter occurs
in the hand.

    display_hand(hand)

This function displays the `hand` dictionary by printing all of the letters in 
the hand on the same line.

You can run the file the usual way (`python -i wordgames.py`) and test out these 
functions. Make sure you understand what these functions do and how a hand of 
letters is represented in the game. So open up the file and look at the code!

### Unit testing

The assignment is structured so that you will write a number of modular
functions and then glue them together to form the complete word playing game.
Instead of waiting until the entire game is ready, you should test each
function you write, individually, before moving on. This approach is known as
unit testing, and it will help you debug your code.

We have provided several test functions to get you started. As you make
progress on the problem set, run `test_wordgames.py` as you go.

If your code passes the unit tests you will see a `SUCCESS` message; otherwise
you will see a `FAILURE` message. These tests aren't exhaustive. You may want
to test your code in other ways too.

If you run `test_wordgames.py` using the provided `wordgames.py` skeleton, you
should see the `deal_hand()` test pass (already provided) and the other tests 
fail. These are the other provided test functions:

    test_get_word_score() # Test the get_word_score() implementation.
    test_update_hand()    # Test the update_hand() implementation.
    test_is_valid_word()  # Test the is_valid_word() implementation.


## Problem 0: Reading the words file

For this game we will need to check that a word the user typed is an English
word, so they can't just make up a word using all the letters. But we need to be 
sure it is an actual word (or not), so we can't use letter probabilities like in 
the Caesar cipher. The easiest solution would be to just have a list of all the 
existing words and check against that. To save you some typing, we have provided
a text file containing 83667 words. Now all you need to do, is read it into
Python!

This file (`words.txt`) is in plain text, so you can open it with a text editor, 
but you can also read it from Python. The built-in function `open(name)` 
[link](https://docs.python.org/2/library/functions.html#open) takes the name 
of the file as a parameter and returns a file object you can use to read the file.

    >>> words_file = open('words.txt')
    >>> print words_file
    <open file 'words.txt', mode 'r' at 0xb7f4b380>

Mode 'r' indicates that this file is open for reading (as opposed to 'w' for writing).

The file object provides several functions for reading, including `readline()` 
[link](https://docs.python.org/2/library/stdtypes.html#bltin-file-objects),  
which reads characters from the file until it gets to a **newline** (an _enter_ 
character, which looks like `\n`) and returns the result as a string:

    >>> words_file.readline()
    'AA\n'

The first word in this particular list is _aa_ which is a kind of lava. The `\n` 
represents the newline, that separate this word from the next.

The file object keeps track of where it is in the file, so if you call readline 
again, you get the next word:

    >>> words_file.readline()
    'AAH\n'

And you can keep doing this to get the next word and the next word, etc. And in 
most programming languages, this is what you would do... keep calling `readline()` 
until there are no lines left. Python, being the great language that it is, will 
make the job even easier. You can also use a file object as part of a for loop:

    words_file = open('words.txt')
    for line in words_file:
        print line

This code should print each line of the file in order. Paste this code into the 
`load_words()` function in `wordgames.py` and try it out.

Note that there is an extra enter between each word, this is the _newline_ 
character at the end of each word. Also, the words are in _ALL CAPS_. See if
you can edit this code to solve those problems.

**If you don't know how to do something in Python, Google it!** These are common 
problems in programming and with most common problems, usually Python will have 
some functions built-in to solve it.

With these 2 problems fixed, `load_words()` is almost done. All you need to 
to do now is, instead of printing each word, the word should be added to a list.
Finally, the function should return this list.


## Problem 1: Scoring a word

The next step is to implement some code that allows us to calculate the score
for a single word. The function `get_word_score(word)` should accept a string of
lowercase letters as input (a word) and return the integer score for that word,
using the game's scoring rules.

Fill in the code for `get_word_score(word)` in `wordgames.py`.

**IMPORTANT: All problems this week should be solved using _for_ or _while_
loops. This means no recursion and no using old solutions (even if this problem 
might seem a bit familiar)!**

You may *assume* that the input word is always either a string of lowercase
letters, or the empty string `""`. You will want to use the
`SCRABBLE_LETTER_VALUES` dictionary defined at the top of `wordgames.py`. You
should not change its value.

Do not assume that there are always 7 letters in a hand! The parameter `n` is
the number of letters required for a bonus score (the maximum number of letters
in the hand).

Testing: if this function is implemented properly, and you run
`test_wordgames.py`, you should see that the `test_get_word_score()` tests pass.

Also test your implementation of `get_word_score` manually using some reasonable
English words.


